* _zfs-fuse_ is in ubuntu repositories
* _zfs_ and _zpool_ are to be run as _sudo_
* NO partitioning
* `disks` tool &/ other partition managers might show the disk as Free/unused. 

### Create Pool
`sudo zpool create -f -m /mnt/mountpoint zfspoolnamehere /dev/disks/by-id/carefully_choose_the_correct_disk`

### Options
* can be set during `zpool create` with `-o option=value` for each option, or `sudo zpool set option=value zfspoolnamehere`

`copies=2` to keep 2 copies of each file in the disk. (Single Disk. No RAID setup)
`dedup=on` deduplication

### Maintenance

* Scrub to run a check
`sudo zpool scrub name-of-zfs-pool`  

* Check will run in background. Check the status.  
`sudo zfs status name-of-zfs-pool`  

* Is copying to `dedup`ed zfs drive is too slow? turn off duplicate checking if needed
`sudo zfs set dedup=off name-of-zfs-pool`  

### Disconnecting and Reconnecting zfs hard drives

The pool has to be _exported_ before the hard drive can be removed from the system.

`sudo zpool export name-of-the-pool`

*CAUTION:* Don't use`-f` option; forcefully removes a drive. May cause data loss. 


After export and removal, the hard drive can be connected to the same or different computer later. 

`sudo zpool import` -- lists the details of available pools  
`sudo zpool import name-of-the-pool` -- to import the pool.


### Snapshots

`sudo zfs set listsnapshots=on name-of-zfs-pool`
Now, `sudo zfs list` will show snapshots too.

more: [Displaying and Accessing Snapshots](http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19253-01/819-5461/6n7ht6r4j/index.html)

### Resources

* https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/ZFS
* `man zfs` (example scenarios at the bottom)